**ARNAV**
Introduction 

Technology is constantly being upgraded and Indians are constantly renewing their electronic equipments and gadgets. Discarded and obsolete electronic equipments are known as e-waste, and it is becoming a worldwide problem.
Disposing of e-waste safely and securely is very important for general practices, as it is for individuals and businesses. 
The Royal Indian College of General Practitioners has compiled this resource to explain what e-waste is, 
and to advise on ways to minimise it and dispose of it safely. *** 

What is e-waste? 

E-waste is the term used for discarded electrical and electronic technologies; it includes items such as:
•	 computers, laptops and tablets
•	 televisions 
•	 mobile phones
•	 digital cameras
•	 printers and photocopiers
•	 fax machines
•	 USBs.
Such equipments may or may not be in working order. With technology constantly being upgraded, disposal of obsolete electronic equipment is occurring frequently. E-waste has accumulated at such a rapid rate that 
it has become the fastest growing form of waste in India. 
By 2028 this number is expected to rise to 1,81,000 tonnes.
Until recently, e-waste has not been disposed of in the most 
efficient and environmentally sound manner. 

Why is e-waste a problem?

Indians are among the highest users of new technology, and produce the most e-waste from obsolete electronic goods.
E-waste is one of the fastest growing types of waste. E-waste now makes up 5% of all municipal solid wastes 
worldwide, nearly the same amount as all plastic packaging, but it is more hazardous.
E-waste has a negative impact on our environment and is putting pressure on limited landfill capacity in 
Australia and all around the world. 
Electronic technology includes toxic and harmful materials that to date have not been disposed of efficiently 
or safely. Treating e-waste correctly will help minimise pollution, protect our environment and reduce our 
carbon footprint. 
Many of the materials that make up electronic technology can be recycled for other uses. For example, 90% 
of the materials in a mobile phone handset can be recovered and reused. 60% to 90% of future greenhouse gas emissions can be reduced by using these recycled materials.

Fact: Recycling 50,000 mobile phone handsets can remove the need to mine 110 tonnes of gold ore, 213 tonnes of silver-bearing ore or 11 tonnes of copper sulphide ore

What happens to e-waste?

Electronic waste contains many components that can be recycled and reused. These resources, such as plastics and glass, can be recovered to manufacture new products. Once hazardous materials like bromine, 
lead, mercury and zinc are removed, the remaining components, such as cables, metals and circuit boards, 
can be recycled. 
Unfortunately, e-waste is not always disposed of in an environmentally friendly way and at times has been 
dumped as hazardous waste. A staggering amount of e-waste from developed countries is being exported 
and dumped in developing countries such as Ghana. This is an illegal trade that is being investigated by the 
Indian government, and the national Hazardous Waste Act is under review to ensure that everything is 
being done to cease this trade. It is important to know what is happening to your e-waste and ensure it is 
being recycled by a reputable organisation. 
The National Television and Computer Recycling Scheme also aims to improve the recycling of these 
materials, minimising the solid and hazardous waste that ends up in landfill. This helps reduce the need to 
use raw materials and assists in saving our natural resources. 
Before you discard your old computer, consider whether it is still in good working condition. Perhaps, instead of 
being disposed of, it could be donated to a local community group or charity



What Are the Top Environmental Problems with e-waste?
electronic waste solutions

In our digital age, it seems fewer and fewer consumers can survive without their electronics, from their smartphone to our laptops and even the increasing amount of “smart homes” technology we’re investing in. As a result, our environment could really use a break from older and unwanted devices. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that nearly 250 million computers will become obsolete in the next five years. 

E-waste contains a wide list of toxins, including mercury, cadmium, hexavalent chromium, and fire retardant. Cathode ray tubes in computer monitors contain high concentrations of lead.

But in the India, most states leave it up to individual consumers to decide what they want to do with their outdated equipment, and most people are simply throwing them out, which is polluting our waterways, soil and air.

Regulation of e-waste in India

Despite the huge increase of e-waste over the past decade in India, the regulatory framework for management is weakly distributed in terms of implementation and compliance.  The first policy effort towards addressing e-waste was the 2008 Guidelines for environmentally sound management of e-waste,6 which provided information about various types of e-waste components, methods for assessing their toxicity, and appropriate technologies for processing or managing them. The guidelines proposed the Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) as a mechanism for managing e-waste, but did not provide any details on how it would be implemented. The EPR requires the producer to take back their end-of-life products returned by consumers for recycling and disposal.

The second major policy introduced in 2008 was the Hazardous Wastes (Management, Handling and Transboundary Movement) Rules,7 which banned imports of e-waste to India for disposal. The rules prescribed allowable concentration limits for all the hazardous and non-hazardous substances in e-waste components, but provided no clear framework for monitoring and enforcing compliance.

In 2011, the Indian government established the E-Waste (Handling and Management) Rules, which was subsequently replaced by the revised E-waste (Management) Rules of 2016.8 These rules provide the most comprehensive information regarding the responsibilities of various players in e-waste management. They incorporate the Hazardous Waste Rules (also revised in 2016) for specifying concentrations of hazardous compounds in e-waste and their transboundary movements.

The 2016 E-waste Rules outline the procedures for producers/manufacturers, dealers, recyclers, and dismantlers to obtain authorisation from relevant government agencies and administrative bodies to manage e-waste. They also identify the responsibilities of collection centres, refurbishers, individual and bulk consumers for handling e-waste. All electrical and electronic equipment and their components are classified and assigned unique codes. Producers are prescribed recycling targets based on the amount of e-waste they generate.

The Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) mechanism is a mandatory component of the 2016 Rules. The rules define the term ‘producer’ as any person or entity that manufactures and/or sells electrical and electronic equipment and components under its own brand, and/or other domestic and imported brands. All producers are required to prepare an EPR plan according to a prescribed framework and steps for obtaining authorisation. The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) holds responsibility for authorising EPR applications, but the responsibility for compliance monitoring is vested with the relevant State Pollution Control Boards (SPCB). The Rules also suggest the introduction of a Deposit Refund Scheme which allows producers to charge a deposit fee when selling a product and refunding the amount, along with interest earned, when the consumer returns it at the end of its lifecycle.

Although the 2016 Rules are more comprehensive in scope, they are relatively weak in term of ensuring compliance. They do not specify the penalties imposed on EPR defaulters, or on consumers who do not dispose e-waste at dedicated recycling centres, or on dismantlers that contribute to environmental pollution and hazards through unsafe practices.


The main problem with the current regulatory framework is that it fails to directly address the major role played by informal sector workers in handling and recycling e-waste. Unless the informal sectors are recognised and incorporated into the policy development framework, e-waste management will remain ineffective and inefficient in practice. The critical issue is to find ways of linking market information for e-waste with appropriate financial incentives for consumers, and upskilling informal sectors in handling and process
