**MEHEER**

The good news is that there are efficient and successful ways to solve the growing environmental problems that e-waste poses.  And one of the most proven solutions is through recycling and reusing.

If we can make it part of their weekly routine to recycle plastics, cans, and newspapers, why not a used smartphone or laptop as well?

Avoid the health and environmental hazards caused by e-waste. Reduce new purchases, reuse, repair, and recycle unused electronic gadgets and equipment. E-waste does not need to be wasted. There are many other uses which we will discuss below.

Steps to avoid these hazards 

Reduce
The first line of defense in minimizing e-waste is to reduce purchases of new electronic devices and electrical equipment. Think twice before buying a new electronic gadget when an upgrade or new device becomes available. Not buying new stuff is good for the environment and your wallet. You can use the same device without having to buy a new device.




Reuse
Another way to reduce e-waste is to redeploy existing items to new owners. How many people have an old cell phone or laptop stashed as a backup that never gets used? Pre-owned electronic devices can be put to good use by other people.

Regift Computer to a friend or family member
Donate to a school, community center, nonprofit, Salvation Army, Goodwill, or charitable organization
Sell or giveaway using services like Gazelle or Freecycle
Keep in mind the person or organization you give, donate, or sell your used electronic devices to may or may not recycle them properly down the road.


Repair
When electronic devices and electrical equipment break down, they can often be repaired. People may choose to toss out the old unit and buy a new replacement because it seems cheaper and less hassle.

When one considers that retail prices do not include the cost of environmental damage and health issues caused by dumping e-waste in landfills or recycling it unsafely. So before buying next time please start considering the environmental damage.
 
It may require a little extra effort to repair an item or have it repaired. There is a growing movement for do-it-yourself electronic gadget repair which is good for the environment, empowers people, and often saves money.


Recycle / E-Cycle
E-waste contains valuable materials as well as potentially toxic substances and can be safely recycled to recover metals and other materials for reuse and dispose of toxins appropriately.


Education
The second most important solution is to educate people about how important recycling is for e-waste. It can begin with setting an example. Make a commitment on your own to take any electronic device you have that’s no longer wanted or being used, and bring it to a recycling firm rather than throw it out with your regular trash or tossing it in a desk drawer.

But then it’s also important to be vocal about that with others. They should note that you adopted the practice of recycling each device out of concern for our environment.

Start spreading the word by writing about the environmental benefits of e-waste on social media to spread awareness around the world.


Teach
It’s important to spread that message to your family, friends, neighbors, and coworkers, but it’s also important to get the message to our future leaders — our children.

You could start by asking your teacher if you could work on a project to have all the kids at school bring in the old cell phones their parents no longer want, and teach the students how to collect the devices and get them to a recycling firm.

And it isn’t just schools that have a role to play here. Non-profit organizations, municipal governments and businesses in the private sector can also get involved in hosting community events that promote recycling and educating people about our e-waste challenge and effects on our environment.

Keep Learning
Just as the technology that creates smartphones and other devices keeps changing, the same is true when it comes to e-waste. In the U.S., 25 states now have laws that aim to either prevent used electronics from being sent to landfills, or that promote recycling. The European Union has established new goals for increasing e-waste recycling rates. The United Nations has launched the Step-Initiative to introduce a comprehensive approach to handling E-Waste, while also preparing professionals to work in the field of E-Waste management. We could bring these ideas to India as we are the country with high rates of E-waste. 

The bottom line is a lot of actions are now being taken to provide practical solutions to e-waste problems — solutions that address environmental and health concerns, while at the same time emphasizing other issues.



Electronic Recycling Collection
Annually, computer devices account for nearly 70% of e-waste, 12% comes from the telecom sector, 8% from medical equipment and 7% from electric equipment. The government, public sector companies, and private sector companies generate nearly 75% of electronic waste, with the contribution of individual household being only 16%
E-Waste Dropped Off During Earth Day Event Recycle Cities or organizations may offer periodic e-cycling events where people can drop off their used electronics. Sports teams promote electronic recycling by allowing fans to drop off their e-waste at the venue and then enjoy the game.
Some manufacturers and retailers offer drop-off or mail-in take back programs.


Below are a few of the many websites that help people find places to recycle their unwanted electronics. Look for electronic recyclers that are e-Stewards or R2 certified.

CLEAN e-INDIA | Recycle Electronic Waste in India | eWaste Management & Collection (cleaneindia.org)
eWaste (greene.gov.in)
Green India – E-Waste Management & Recycling (greenindiarecycling.co.in)


E-Waste Exchange

Important Note About Deleting Personal Information

Before donating, passing on, or recycling a cell phone, smartphone, tablet, computer, data storage device, etc. make sure your personal information is removed. Mobile device procedures vary by manufacturer. Deleting files, reformatting, or restoring the operating system to factory settings is not sufficient for PCs and Macs. Use a disk-wiping program to make sure all data is deleted and cannot be retrieved.


/*YOUR PART*/

What can I do to be part of the solution?

Begin to discard electronic waste in a responsible way. It is no longer acceptable to leave electronic hardware on the nature strip for garbage collection. Recycling companies can be contacted to collect various types of e-waste that need to be removed and recycled, and there are organisations where you can drop off your e-waste without 
charge. 

Initial steps include: 
•	 avoid purchasing new electronic products that cannot be reused and recycled by the manufacturer
•	 reduce your consumption of electronic devices, and repair broken equipment before purchasing new 
             items.
•	 reuse your electronic devices by donating items to charity, friends or family
•	 recycle your electronic devices instead of sending them to landfill


Computers and televisions

While the National Television and Computer Recycling Scheme is being rolled out and more collection and 
recycle drop-off points are announced, here are some suggestions for what you can do with computers and 
televisions that you no longer need:
•	 if they are still in good working order, ask a charity, school or secondhand store if they will take them
•	 pass them on to friends or family
•	 contact your local council for more information on their recycling services 
•	 store electronic equipment out of the weather until access to the scheme is available in your area
•	 approach a company that will refurbish your old computer equipment for use by those who cannot afford 
new items

Mobile phones

Mobile phones are constructed out of numerous non-renewable materials such as plastics, metals, ceramics 
and glass, and the contents vary from model to model. As mobile phone technology continuously advances, 
the materials can change; there is no exact formula or single list of the substances used for mobile phones.
However, around 90% of these non-renewable materials can be recycled and reused. The official recycling 
program of the mobile phone industry is run by MobileMuster. It is a voluntary recycling program that collects 
and recycles mobile phone handsets, batteries, chargers and accessories. There are drop-off points across 
India located at mobile phone retailers, local councils, government agents and business. 
MobileMuster ensures that all components of the mobile phones are recycled to the highest environmental 
standards and that none is refurbished or resold in developing countries
Many mobile phone parts can be recycled and reused:
•	 batteries include nickel, cobalt and cadmium, which can be used to make stainless steel and new batteries
•	 circuit boards include small amounts of gold and silver that can be used in jewellery and other applications
•	 handset casings include plastics that can be reused to make fence posts and pallets
•	 plastics and metals found in mobile phone accessories can be shredded, sorted and used to make new 
            plastic or metal products.
But remember, prior to handing in your mobile device for recycling, ensure that all sensitive data have been 
removed!
Mobile phones contain highly toxic elements, including cadmium, arsenic, lead and mercury. It is important 
that our old mobile phones do not end up in landfill.


Fact: There are over 22 million unwanted mobile phones hidden away in drawers, cupboards 
and garages across India, the equivalent of 2200 tonnes of metal, minerals, plastic and glass. 
These are all materials that could be recycled and reused!


Printers, photocopiers and fax machines

Large electronic office equipment, such as printers and photocopiers, can be collected or dropped off 
at recycling plants. Some recycling companies will come and pick up equipment for a fee. They will then 
remove and recycle ferrous and non-ferrous materials.
•	Use Cartridges 4 Planet Ark, a national program, to recycle your printer cartridges. Don’t throw 
            them in the garbage bin!
•	Visit the electrical equipment pages on the website Business Recycling for information about recycling 
e-waste and to search for local recycling options.


How to securely remove data before disposing of e-waste

Before any of your electronic equipment can be recycled or donated from general practice, it is important to 
remove all data from the device. Data can be related to personal details of patients or information about the 
business of your practice. 
Failure to remove data from these electronic devices, particularly sensitive information, breaches patient information privacy and security. 
If electronic media such as hard drives, USB flash drives, CDs and DVDs are not properly erased, patient data and general business data may be used for many purposes, such as appropriating and creating bank accounts and loans, or purchasing medicines and medical insurance.
Patient-identifiable information can be a prime target for identity theft.
Sold and donated computers have been found in secondary markets, such as auctions, still containing personal information.
This data can be more valuable than the electronic equipment it is stored on. Further, it can be relatively easy for those who are technically capable to recover such information from any electronic media.



Don’t just delete files

It is not sufficient to delete files and documents on your computer, or to drag and drop files into the recycle 
bin. The data after deletion still reside on the hard drive even though you cannot access them directly. It is 
very important to take further measures to ensure this data are securely erased.

How to recycle storage devices

Before these items are sent to be recycled, ensure all sensitive data are removed to maintain data security. 
Data can easily be deleted from CDs and DVDs; these data are non-recoverable. 
CDs, DVDs, USB flash drives and external hard drives are all used as data storage devices. Disks are often 
discarded into bins when the data are no longer required; however, it is important to remember that CDs 
and DVDs are non-biodegradable products that contain toxic chemicals and metals. These toxins can 
contaminate the environment if they end up in landfill. 
CDs and DVDs can be recycled to reuse up to 98% of the original disk, including the polycarbonate 
(plastic) materials and aluminium found within these items.


Remove data from mobile phones

Before recycling your mobile phone, make sure any sensitive information saved onto the phone memory is 
erased. While the subscriber identification module (SIM) card can be transferred from your old to your new 
updated mobile phone, information stored on these cards can also be simply deleted if no longer required. 
Information on how to remove data from your mobile phone can be found on the handset manufacturer’s 
website.

